lightning: add load data doc (#12959)
pingcap/docs: sql-statements/sql-statement-load-data.md

LoadDataOption ::=
    detached | batch_size '=' numberLiteral
```

## Parameters

### `LOCAL`

You can use `LOCAL` to specify to import data files located on the client, where the file parameter must be the file system path on the client.

### S3 storage

If you do not specify `LOCAL`, the file parameter must be a valid S3 path, as detailed in [external storage](/br/backup-and-restore-storages.md).

When the data files are stored on S3, you can import individual files or use the wildcard character `*` to match multiple files to be imported. Note that wildcards do not recursively process files in subdirectories. The following are some examples:

- Import a single file: `s3://<bucket-name>/path/to/data/foo.csv`
- Import all files in the specified path: `s3://<bucket-name>/path/to/data/*`
- Import all files ending with `.csv` under the specified path: `s3://<bucket-name>/path/to/data/*.csv`
- Import all files prefixed with `foo` under the specified path: `s3://<bucket-name>/path/to/data/foo*`
- Import all files prefixed with `foo` and ending with `.csv` under the specified path: `s3://<bucket-name>/path/to/data/foo*.csv`

### `FORMAT`

> You can use the `FORMAT` parameter to specify the format of the data file. If you do not specify this parameter, you can use the format defined by `DELIMITED DATA`, which is the data format supported by MySQL `LOAD DATA`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use the `FORMAT` parameter to specify the format of the data file. If you do not specify this parameter, you are using the format defined by `DELIMITED DATA`, which is the default data format of MySQL `LOAD DATA`.
```

### `Fields`, `Lines`, and `Ignore Lines`

You can specify the `Fields`, `Lines`, and `Ignore Lines` parameters only when the data format is `DELIMITED DATA`.

You can use the `Fields` and `Lines` parameters to specify how to handle the data format.

> - `FIELDS TERMINATED BY`: specifies the data delimiter.
> - `FIELDS ENCLOSED BY`: specifies the enclosing character of the data.
> - `LINES TERMINATED BY`: specifies the line terminator, if you want to end a line with a certain character.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Maybe we can skip these explanation for English users, the patameters have clear information and we are not making it better (I don't know what's a "delimiter")

Author: 先保留吧。MySQL 文档里也是用的  delimiter 表示分隔符

> You can use `DEFINED NULL BY` to specify how NULL values are represented in the data file.

Reviewer: We should give examples on this new syntax, will do it later

Author: added as per cn version

> You can use `DEFINED NULL BY` to specify how NULL values are represented in the data file.

Author: ```suggestion
You can use `DEFINED NULL BY` to specify how NULL values are represented in the data file.

- 与 MySQL 行为一致，如果 `ESCAPED BY` 不为空时，例如是默认值 `\`，那么 `\N` 会被认为是 NULL 值。
- 如果使用 `DEFINED NULL BY`，例如 `DEFINED NULL BY 'my-null'`，`my-null` 会被认为是 NULL 值。
- 如果使用 `DEFINED NULL BY ... OPTIONALLY ENCLOSED`，例如 `DEFINED NULL BY 'my-null' OPTIONALLY ENCLOSED`，`my-null` 和 `"my-null"`（假设 `ENCLOSED BY '"'`）会被认为是 NULL 值。
- 如果没有使用 `DEFINED NULL BY` 或者 `DEFINED NULL BY ... OPTIONALLY ENCLOSED`，但使用了 `ENCLOSED BY`，例如 `ENCLOSED BY '"'`，那么 `NULL` 会被认为是 NULL 值。这个行为与 MySQL 一致。
- 其他情况不会被认为是 NULL 值。
```

Take the following data format as an example:

> ```sql

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
```

"bob","20","street 1"\r\n
"alice","33","street 1"\r\n
```

> If you want to extract `bob`, `20`, and `street 1`, specify the delimiter as `','`, and the enclosing character as `'\"'`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you want to extract `bob`, `20`, and `street 1`, specify the field delimiter as `','`, and the enclosing character as `'\"'`:
```

```sql
FIELDS TERMINATED BY ',' ENCLOSED BY '\"' LINES TERMINATED BY '\r\n'
```

If the data format is `DELIMITED DATA` and you do not specify the parameters above, the imported data is processed in the following way by default:

```sql
FIELDS TERMINATED BY '\t' ENCLOSED BY '' ESCAPED BY '\\'
LINES TERMINATED BY '\n' STARTING BY ''
```

You can ignore the first `number` lines of a file by configuring the `IGNORE <number> LINES` parameter. For example, if you configure `IGNORE 1 LINES`, the first line of a file is ignored.

### `WITH detached`

If you do not specify the `LOCAL` parameter, you can use `WITH detached` to make `LOAD DATA` run in the background.

You can view the created jobs with [SHOW LOAD DATA](/sql-statements/sql-statement-show-load-data.md) or you can use [OPERATE LOAD DATA JOB](/sql-statements/sql- statement-operate-load-data-job.md) to cancel or delete the created jobs.

> ### `WITH batch_size=<number>`

Reviewer: This part should not be moved later, don't break "### `WITH detached`" section

And to mention `0` means no splitting

Author: added

> You can specify the number of rows to be written to TiDB in a batch with `WITH batch_size=<number>`. The default value is 1000.

Author: ```suggestion
You can specify the number of rows to be written to TiDB in a batch with `WITH batch_size=<number>`. The default value is `1000`. `0` means no splitting.
```

| Job_ID | Create_Time                | Start_Time                 | End_Time            | Data_Source               | Target_Table       | Import_Mode | Created_By | Job_State | Job_Status | Source_File_Size | Loaded_File_Size | Result_Code | Result_Message |
+--------+----------------------------+----------------------------+---------------------+---------------------------+-------------------+-------------+------------+-----------+------------+------------------+------------------+-------------+----------------+
|      1 | 2023-03-16 22:29:12.990576 | 2023-03-16 22:29:12.991951 | 0000-00-00 00:00:00 | s3://bucket-name/test.csv | `my_db`.`my_table` | logical     | root@%     | loading   | running    | 52.43MB          | 43.58MB          |           0 |                |
+--------+----------------------------+----------------------------+---------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+-------------+------------+-----------+------------+------------------+------------------+-------------+----------------+
1 row in set (0.01 sec)
```

> The following example imports data using `LOAD DATA`. Comma is specified as the delimiter. The double quotation marks that enclose the data are ignored. The first line of the file is ignored.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example imports data using `LOAD DATA`. Comma is specified as the field delimiter. The double quotation marks that enclose the data are ignored. The first line of the file is ignored.
```

```ebnf+diagram
LoadDataStmt ::=
    'LOAD' 'DATA' LocalOpt 'INFILE' stringLit FormatOpt DuplicateOpt 'INTO' 'TABLE' TableName CharsetOpt Fields Lines IgnoreLines ColumnNameOrUserVarListOptWithBrackets LoadDataSetSpecOpt LoadDataOptionListOpt

LocalOpt ::= ('LOCAL')?

FormatOpt ::=
    ('FORMAT' ('DELIMITED DATA' | 'SQL FILE' | 'PARQUET'))?

Fields ::=
    ('TERMINATED' 'BY' stringLit
    | ('OPTIONALLY')? 'ENCLOSED' 'BY' stringLit
    | 'ESCAPED' 'BY' stringLit
    | 'DEFINED' 'NULL' 'BY' stringLit ('OPTIONALLY' 'ENCLOSED')?)?

LoadDataOptionListOpt ::=
    ('WITH' (LoadDataOption (',' LoadDataOption)*))?

LoadDataOption ::=
    detached | batch_size '=' numberLiteral
```

## Parameters

### `LOCAL`

> You can use `LOCAL` to specify to import data files located on the client, where the file parameter must be the file system path on the client.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can use `LOCAL` to specify data files on the client to be imported, where the file parameter must be the file system path on the client.
```

- Import all files ending with `.csv` under the specified path: `s3://<bucket-name>/path/to/data/*.csv`
- Import all files prefixed with `foo` under the specified path: `s3://<bucket-name>/path/to/data/foo*`
- Import all files prefixed with `foo` and ending with `.csv` under the specified path: `s3://<bucket-name>/path/to/data/foo*.csv`

### `FORMAT`

You can use the `FORMAT` parameter to specify the format of the data file. If you do not specify this parameter, you are using the format defined by `DELIMITED DATA`, which is the default data format of MySQL `LOAD DATA`.

### `Fields`, `Lines`, and `Ignore Lines`

You can specify the `Fields`, `Lines`, and `Ignore Lines` parameters only when the data format is `DELIMITED DATA`.

You can use the `Fields` and `Lines` parameters to specify how to handle the data format.

- `FIELDS TERMINATED BY`: specifies the data delimiter.
- `FIELDS ENCLOSED BY`: specifies the enclosing character of the data.
- `LINES TERMINATED BY`: specifies the line terminator, if you want to end a line with a certain character.

You can use `DEFINED NULL BY` to specify how NULL values are represented in the data file.

> - Consistent with MySQL behavior, if `ESCAPED BY` is not null, for example, if the default value is `\`, then `\N` will be considered a NULL value.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Consistent with MySQL behavior, if `ESCAPED BY` is not null, for example, if the default value `\` is used, then `\N` will be considered a NULL value.
```

> - If you use `DEFINED NULL BY`, for example `DEFINED NULL BY 'my-null'`, `my-null` will be considered a NULL value.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- If you use `DEFINED NULL BY`, such as `DEFINED NULL BY 'my-null'`, `my-null` is considered a NULL value.
```

> - If you use `DEFINED NULL BY ... OPTIONALLY ENCLOSED`, such as `DEFINED NULL BY 'my-null' OPTIONALLY ENCLOSED`, `my-null` and `"my-null"` (assuming `ENCLOSED BY '"`) will be considered NULL values.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- If you use `DEFINED NULL BY ... OPTIONALLY ENCLOSED`, such as `DEFINED NULL BY 'my-null' OPTIONALLY ENCLOSED`, `my-null` and `"my-null"` (assuming `ENCLOSED BY '"`) are considered NULL values.
```

> - If you do not use `DEFINED NULL BY` or `DEFINED NULL BY ... OPTIONALLY ENCLOSED`, but use `ENCLOSED BY`, such as `ENCLOSED BY '"'`, then `NULL` will be considered a NULL value. This behavior is consistent with MySQL.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- If you do not use `DEFINED NULL BY` or `DEFINED NULL BY ... OPTIONALLY ENCLOSED`, but use `ENCLOSED BY`, such as `ENCLOSED BY '"'`, then `NULL` is considered a NULL value. This behavior is consistent with MySQL.
```

> - In other cases, it will not be considered a NULL value.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- In other cases, it is not considered a NULL value.
```

"alice","33","street 1"\r\n
```

If you want to extract `bob`, `20`, and `street 1`, specify the field delimiter as `','`, and the enclosing character as `'\"'`:

```sql
FIELDS TERMINATED BY ',' ENCLOSED BY '\"' LINES TERMINATED BY '\r\n'
```

If the data format is `DELIMITED DATA` and you do not specify the parameters above, the imported data is processed in the following way by default:

```sql
FIELDS TERMINATED BY '\t' ENCLOSED BY '' ESCAPED BY '\\'
LINES TERMINATED BY '\n' STARTING BY ''
```

You can ignore the first `number` lines of a file by configuring the `IGNORE <number> LINES` parameter. For example, if you configure `IGNORE 1 LINES`, the first line of a file is ignored.

### `WITH detached`

If you do not specify the `LOCAL` parameter, you can use `WITH detached` to make `LOAD DATA` run in the background.

> You can view the created jobs with [SHOW LOAD DATA](/sql-statements/sql-statement-show-load-data.md) or you can use [OPERATE LOAD DATA JOB](/sql-statements/sql- statement-operate-load-data-job.md) to cancel or delete the created jobs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can view the created jobs via [`SHOW LOAD DATA`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-show-load-data.md) or you can use [`[CANCEL|DROP] LOAD DATA`](/sql-statements/sql- statement-operate-load-data-job.md) to cancel or delete the created jobs.
```

### `WITH batch_size=<number>`

You can specify the number of rows to be written to TiDB in a batch with `WITH batch_size=<number>`. The default value is `1000`. `0` means no splitting.

## Examples

> When the job is run in the background, the corresponding job id is output after execution.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For a background job, the corresponding job id is output after the job execution.
```

```sql
LOAD DATA INFILE 's3://bucket-name/test.csv?access_key=XXX&secret_access_key=XXX' INTO TABLE my_db.my_table FIELDS TERMINATED BY ',' OPTIONALLY ENCLOSED BY '' LINES TERMINATED BY '\n' WITH detached;
```

```sql
+--------+
| Job_ID |
+--------+
|      1 |
+--------+
1 row in set (3.14 sec)
```

```sql
SHOW LOAD DATA JOB 1;
```

```sql
+--------+----------------------------+----------------------------+---------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+-------------+------------+-----------+------------+------------------+------------------+-------------+----------------+
| Job_ID | Create_Time                | Start_Time                 | End_Time            | Data_Source               | Target_Table       | Import_Mode | Created_By | Job_State | Job_Status | Source_File_Size | Loaded_File_Size | Result_Code | Result_Message |
+--------+----------------------------+----------------------------+---------------------+---------------------------+-------------------+-------------+------------+-----------+------------+------------------+------------------+-------------+----------------+

> |      1 | 2023-03-16 22:29:12.990576 | 2023-03-16 22:29:12.991951 | 0000-00-00 00:00:00 | s3://bucket-name/test.csv | `my_db`.`my_table` | logical     | root@%     | loading   | running    | 52.43MB          | 43.58MB          |           0 |                |

Reviewer 4: 这里的单位是 MB 还是 MiB ？@lance6716

Reviewer: 确实是 MB，这个是一个库进行 human-friendly 转换的。

+--------+----------------------------+----------------------------+---------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+-------------+------------+-----------+------------+------------------+------------------+-------------+----------------+
1 row in set (0.01 sec)
```

The following example imports data using `LOAD DATA`. Comma is specified as the field delimiter. The double quotation marks that enclose the data are ignored. The first line of the file is ignored.

> If you see the error message `ERROR 1148 (42000): the used command is not allowed with this TiDB version`, refer to [ERROR 1148 (42000): the used command is not allowed with this TiDB version](/error-codes.md#mysql-native-error-messages).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you see the `ERROR 1148 (42000): the used command is not allowed with this TiDB version`, refer to [ERROR 1148 (42000): the used command is not allowed with this TiDB version](/error-codes.md#mysql-native-error-messages) for troubleshooting.
```

```

```sql
Query OK, 815264 rows affected (39.63 sec)
Records: 815264  Deleted: 0  Skipped: 0  Warnings: 0
```

`LOAD DATA` also supports using hexadecimal ASCII character expressions or binary ASCII character expressions as the parameters for `FIELDS ENCLOSED BY` and `FIELDS TERMINATED BY`. See the following example:

```sql
LOAD DATA LOCAL INFILE '/mnt/evo970/data-sets/bikeshare-data/2017Q4-capitalbikeshare-tripdata.csv' INTO TABLE trips FIELDS TERMINATED BY x'2c' ENCLOSED BY b'100010' LINES TERMINATED BY '\r\n' IGNORE 1 LINES (duration, start_date, end_date, start_station_number, start_station, end_station_number, end_station, bike_number, member_type);
```

In the above example, `x'2c'` is the hexadecimal representation of the `,` character, and `b'100010'` is the binary representation of the `"` character.

## MySQL compatibility

This statement is understood to be fully compatible with MySQL, except for character set options which are parsed but ignored. If you find any compatibility difference, you can [report it via an issue](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/new/choose) on GitHub.

> **Note:**
>

> > - In earlier releases of TiDB, `LOAD DATA` committed every 20000 rows. In later versions (version <= v6.6.0), TiDB commits all rows in one transaction by default.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> - In earlier releases of TiDB, `LOAD DATA` committed every 20000 rows. 
> - In later versions (version <= v6.6.0), TiDB commits all rows in one transaction by default.
```

> - Starting from v7.0.0, the number of rows to be committed in a batch is controlled by the `WITH batch_size=<number>` parameter of the `LOAD DATA` statement, which defaults to 1000 rows per commit.

> > - After upgrading from TiDB v4.0.0 or earlier versions, an error might occur `ERROR 8004 (HY000) at line 1: Transaction is too large, size: 100000058`. The recommended way to resolve this error is to increase the [`txn-total-size-limit`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#txn-total-size-limit) value in your `tidb.toml` file. If you are unable to increase this limit, you can also restore the behavior before upgrade by setting [`tidb_dml_batch_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_dml_batch_size) to `20000`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> - After upgrading from TiDB v4.0.0 or earlier versions, `ERROR 8004 (HY000) at line 1: Transaction is too large, size: 100000058` might occur. The recommended way to resolve this error is to increase the [`txn-total-size-limit`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#txn-total-size-limit) value in your `tidb.toml` file. If you are unable to increase this limit, you can also restore the behavior before the upgrade by setting [`tidb_dml_batch_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_dml_batch_size) to `20000`.
```

```

```sql
Query OK, 815264 rows affected (39.63 sec)
Records: 815264  Deleted: 0  Skipped: 0  Warnings: 0
```

`LOAD DATA` also supports using hexadecimal ASCII character expressions or binary ASCII character expressions as the parameters for `FIELDS ENCLOSED BY` and `FIELDS TERMINATED BY`. See the following example:

```sql
LOAD DATA LOCAL INFILE '/mnt/evo970/data-sets/bikeshare-data/2017Q4-capitalbikeshare-tripdata.csv' INTO TABLE trips FIELDS TERMINATED BY x'2c' ENCLOSED BY b'100010' LINES TERMINATED BY '\r\n' IGNORE 1 LINES (duration, start_date, end_date, start_station_number, start_station, end_station_number, end_station, bike_number, member_type);
```

In the above example, `x'2c'` is the hexadecimal representation of the `,` character, and `b'100010'` is the binary representation of the `"` character.

## MySQL compatibility

This statement is understood to be fully compatible with MySQL, except for character set options which are parsed but ignored. If you find any compatibility difference, you can [report it via an issue](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/new/choose) on GitHub.

> **Note:**
>

> > - In versions earlier than TiDB v4.0.0, `LOAD DATA` committed every 20000 rows. 

Author: ```suggestion
> - For versions earlier than TiDB v4.0.0, `LOAD DATA` committed every 20000 rows. 
```

> > - In earlier releases of TiDB, `LOAD DATA` committed every 20000 rows. 
> > - In later versions (version <= v6.6.0), TiDB commits all rows in one transaction by default.
> > - Starting from v7.0.0, the number of rows to be committed in a batch is controlled by the `WITH batch_size=<number>` parameter of the `LOAD DATA` statement, which defaults to 1000 rows per commit.

Author: ```suggestion
> - In versions earlier than TiDB v4.0.0, `LOAD DATA` committed every 20000 rows. 
> - For versions from TiDB v4.0.0 to v6.6.0, TiDB commits all rows in one transaction by default.
> - Starting from TiDB v7.0.0, the number of rows to be committed in a batch is controlled by the `WITH batch_size=<number>` parameter of the `LOAD DATA` statement, which defaults to 1000 rows per commit.
```

```

```sql
Query OK, 815264 rows affected (39.63 sec)
Records: 815264  Deleted: 0  Skipped: 0  Warnings: 0
```

`LOAD DATA` also supports using hexadecimal ASCII character expressions or binary ASCII character expressions as the parameters for `FIELDS ENCLOSED BY` and `FIELDS TERMINATED BY`. See the following example:

```sql
LOAD DATA LOCAL INFILE '/mnt/evo970/data-sets/bikeshare-data/2017Q4-capitalbikeshare-tripdata.csv' INTO TABLE trips FIELDS TERMINATED BY x'2c' ENCLOSED BY b'100010' LINES TERMINATED BY '\r\n' IGNORE 1 LINES (duration, start_date, end_date, start_station_number, start_station, end_station_number, end_station, bike_number, member_type);
```

In the above example, `x'2c'` is the hexadecimal representation of the `,` character, and `b'100010'` is the binary representation of the `"` character.

## MySQL compatibility

This statement is understood to be fully compatible with MySQL, except for character set options which are parsed but ignored. If you find any compatibility difference, you can [report it via an issue](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/new/choose) on GitHub.

<CustomContent platform="tidb">

> **Note:**
>

> > - For versions earlier than TiDB v4.0.0, `LOAD DATA` committed every 20000 rows.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> - For versions earlier than TiDB v4.0.0, `LOAD DATA` commits every 20000 rows.
```

> - For versions from TiDB v4.0.0 to v6.6.0, TiDB commits all rows in one transaction by default.
> - Starting from TiDB v7.0.0, the number of rows to be committed in a batch is controlled by the `WITH batch_size=<number>` parameter of the `LOAD DATA` statement, which defaults to 1000 rows per commit.
> - After upgrading from TiDB v4.0.0 or earlier versions, `ERROR 8004 (HY000) at line 1: Transaction is too large, size: 100000058` might occur. The recommended way to resolve this error is to increase the [`txn-total-size-limit`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#txn-total-size-limit) value in your `tidb.toml` file. If you are unable to increase this limit, you can also restore the behavior before the upgrade by setting [`tidb_dml_batch_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_dml_batch_size) to `20000`.

</CustomContent>

<CustomContent platform="tidb-cloud">

> **Note:**
>

> > - For versions earlier than TiDB v4.0.0, `LOAD DATA` committed every 20000 rows.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> - For versions earlier than TiDB v4.0.0, `LOAD DATA` commits every 20000 rows.
```

> - For versions from TiDB v4.0.0 to v6.6.0, TiDB commits all rows in one transaction by default.
> - Starting from TiDB v7.0.0, the number of rows to be committed in a batch is controlled by the `WITH batch_size=<number>` parameter of the `LOAD DATA` statement, which defaults to 1000 rows per commit.

> > - After upgrading from TiDB v4.0.0 or earlier versions, `ERROR 8004 (HY000) at line 1: Transaction is too large, size: 100000058` might occur. The recommended way to resolve this error is to increase the [`txn-total-size-limit`](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/tidb-configuration-file#txn-total-size-limit) value in your `tidb.toml` file. If you are unable to increase this limit, you can also restore the behavior before the upgrade by setting [`tidb_dml_batch_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_dml_batch_size) to `20000`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> - After upgrading from TiDB v4.0.0 or earlier versions, `ERROR 8004 (HY000) at line 1: Transaction is too large, size: 100000058` might occur. To resolve this error, you can restore the behavior before the upgrade by setting [`tidb_dml_batch_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_dml_batch_size) to `20000`.
```

Reviewer 3: reason: TiDB Cloud users cannot update tidb-configuration-file by themselves.
